                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                       Version 3, 29 June 2007

 Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <https://fsf.org/>
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

                            Preamble

  The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for
software and other kinds of works.

  The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed
to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By contrast,
the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to
share and change all versions of a programâ€”to make sure it remains free
software for all its users.  We, the Free Software Foundation, use the
GNU General Public License for most of our software; it applies also to
any other work released this way by its authors.  You can apply it to
your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you
these rights or asking you to surrender the rights.  Therefore, you have
certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if
you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same
freedoms that you received.  You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code.  And you must show them these terms so they
know their rights.

  Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps:
(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) offer you this License
giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify it.

  For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearly explains
that there is no warranty for this free software.  For both users' and
authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be marked as
changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to
authors of previous versions.

  Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run
modified versions of the software inside them, although the manufacturer
can do so.  This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim of
protecting users' freedom to change the software.  The systematic
pattern of such abuse occurs in the area of products for individuals to
use, which is precisely where it is most unacceptable.  Therefore, we
have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for those
products.  If such problems arise substantially in other domains, we
stand ready to extend this provision to those domains in future versions
of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom of users.

  Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of
software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it effectively proprietary.  To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

  0. Definitions.

  "This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.

  "Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds
of works, such as semiconductor masks.

  "The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this
License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" and
"recipients" may be individuals or organizations.

  "Source code" means the preferred form of the work for making
modifications to it.  "Object code" means any non-source form of a work.

  "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code means all the source
code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable work) run the
object code and to modify the work, including scripts to control those
activities.  However, it does not include the work's System Libraries,
or general-purpose tools or generally available free programs which are
used unmodified in performing those activities but which are not part of
the work.  For example, Corresponding Source includes interface
definition files associated with source files for header files, library
routines, and assembly language source code for the processor-specific
code used in the Program, but does not include object code for the
compiler used for compiling the Program, or general-purpose tools or
generally available free programs which are used unmodified in
performing those activities but which are not part of the work.

  "The System Libraries" of an executable work include anything, other
than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal form of
packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that Major
Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that Major
Component, or to implement an interface between the work and that Major
Component.  System Libraries are not part of the work.

  "Object code" means compiled, binary, or executable form of a work.

  "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code means all the source
code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable work) run the
object code and to modify the work, including scripts to control those
activities.  However, it does not include the work's System Libraries,
or general-purpose tools or generally available free programs which are
used unmodified in performing those activities but which are not part of
the work.  For example, Corresponding Source includes interface
definition files associated with source files for header files, library
routines, and assembly language source code for the processor-specific
code used in the Program, but does not include object code for the
compiler used for compiling the Program, or general-purpose tools or
generally available free programs which are used unmodified in
performing those activities but which are not part of the work.

  "The System Libraries" of an executable work include anything, other
than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal form of
packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that Major
Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that Major
Component, or to implement an interface between the work and that Major
Component.  System Libraries are not part of the work.

  1. Source Code.

  The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any non-source form of
a work.

  2. Basic Permissions.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention Law.

  No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological
protection measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under
Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, and
implemented by national legislation pursuant to that article ("anticircumvention law"). No covered work shall be deemed to be in violation of
such an anticircumvention law by virtue of its compliance with this License.

  4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  7. Additional Terms.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  8. Termination.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  11. Patents.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  14. Revised Versions of this License.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  15. Disclaimer of Warranty.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  16. Limitation of Liability.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.

  You may copy, modify, distribute, and perform the work, even
commercially, as long as you follow the terms of this license.

  18. Compliance with Other
::contentReference[oaicite:0]{index=0}
 
